# Climate services for health: from global observations to local interventions

This repository contains R scripts used to investigate the impact of global climate product choice in health impact models, using a case study of dengue and malaria in southern coastal Ecuador. We demonstrate that the choice of product as a data input to climate-sensitive disease models can result in different outcomes compared to using local weather station data.

## Materials and Methods
We formulated temporal models of monthly dengue and malaria cases for Machala, a city located in southern coastal Ecuador, which is a key dengue surveillance site (1) and has historically had high rates of malaria transmission (2). Monthly clinically suspected cases of dengue between 2002-2014 and monthly cases of Plasmodium vivax malaria between 1990-2015 were modelled using Bayesian hierarchical mixed models developed previously to model malaria and dengue cases in the region (3,4). We fitted negative binomial and zero-inflated negative binomial models for monthly dengue and malaria cases, respectively. The log of the mean number of cases of dengue (&mu;<sub>dt</sub>) or malaria (&mu;<sub>mt</sub>)is equal to the log population per 100,000 (P<sub>it</sub>) (included as an offset in the model) and log incidence rate (&rho;<sub>it</sub>) for each time *t* (12 years for the dengue model and 26 years for the malaria model) (i). The estimated incidence rate for dengue and malaria then includes explanatory climate variables, x;<sub>it</sub> (mean temperature x;<sub>1t</sub> and precipitation x;<sub>2t</sub>, a monthly random effect (&beta;<sub>t</sub>), introduced using a first order autoregressive model to account for seasonal variation in dengue and malaria, and exchangeable non-structured random effects for each year (&delta;<sub>t</sub>), to account for interannual changes in disease risk due to unobserved factors (3) (ii).

log(&mu;<sub>it</sub>) = log(P<sub>it</sub>) + log(&rho;<sub>it</sub>) (i)

log(&rho;<sub>it</sub>) = &alpha + &beta;<sub>t</sub> + &delta;<sub>t</sub> (ii)

Posterior distributions of model parameters were estimated using Integrated Nested Laplace approximations (INLA), which provide a computationally quicker alternative for implementing models in a Bayesian statistical framework, in comparison to traditional Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods (5). We compared parameter estimates of these models that included mean temperature and precipitation from observed station data and five selected global climate datasets (CHELSA (6), CRU TS. 4.04 (7), ERA5-Land reanalysis (8), TerraClimate (9) and WorldClim historical monthly weather data (10, 11)). Local observed mean temperature and precipitation were obtained from the Granja Santa Ines weather station located in Machala (3°17’26” S, 79°54’5” W). For each of the five climate datasets we chose the grid cell in which the weather station is located and extracted the value for mean temperature and precipitation. To capture the lagged effect of climate on dengue and malaria risk, we calculated seasonal average temperature and precipitation by taking a three-month average (0-2 months). Finally, we compared the output of dengue and malaria models using CRU TS v.404 data using the corresponding grid cell for the Granja Santa Ines meteorological station compared to using the adjacent grid cell.

## References
1.	Stewart-Ibarra, A. M. et al. The Burden of Dengue Fever and Chikungunya in Southern Coastal Ecuador:  Epidemiology, Clinical Presentation, and Phylogenetics from the First Two Years of a Prospective Study. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 98, 1444–1459 (2018).
2.	Krisher, L. K. et al. Successful malaria elimination in the Ecuador–Peru border region: epidemiology and lessons learned. Malar. J. 15, 573 (2016).
3.	Lowe, R. et al. Climate services for health: predicting the evolution of the 2016 dengue season in Machala, Ecuador. Lancet Planet. Heal. 1, e142–e151 (2017).
4.	Fletcher, I. K. et al. The Relative Role of Climate Variation and Control Interventions on Malaria Elimination Efforts in El Oro, Ecuador: A Modeling Study. Frontiers in Environmental Science vol. 8 135 (2020).
5.	Rue, H., Martino, S. & Chopin, N. Approximate Bayesian Inference for Latent Gaussian Models by Using Integrated Nested Laplace Approximations. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B (Statistical Methodol. 71, 319–392 (2009).
6.	Karger, D. N. et al. Climatologies at high resolution for the earth’s land surface areas. Sci. Data 4, 170122 (2017).
7.	Harris, I., Osborn, T. J., Jones, P. & Lister, D. Version 4 of the CRU TS monthly high-resolution gridded multivariate climate dataset. Sci. Data 7, 109 (2020).
8.	Muñoz Sabater, J. ERA5-Land monthly averaged data from 1981 to present. Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S) Climate Data Store (CDS). 10.24381/cds.68d2bb30 (2019).
9.	Abatzoglou, J. T., Dobrowski, S. Z., Parks, S. A. & Hegewisch, K. C. TerraClimate, a high-resolution global dataset of monthly climate and climatic water balance from 1958–2015. Sci. Data 5, 170191 (2018).
10.	Fick, S. E. & Hijmans, R. J. WorldClim 2: new 1km spatial resolution climate surfaces for global land areas. Int. J. Climatol. 37, 4302–4315 (2017).
11.	Harris, I., Jones, P. D., Osborn, T. . & Lister, D. H. Updated high-resolution grids of monthly climatic observations - the CRU TS3.10 Dataset. Int. J. Climatol. 34, 623–642 (2014).
